2.01 Pronunciation is by no means homogeneous. It varies under the influence of numerous factors. These factors lie quite outside any possibility of signaling linguistic meaning so it is appropriate to refer to these factors as extralinguistic
2.02 Phonostylistics is a branch of phonetics that studies the way phonetic units (both segmental and suprasegmental) are used in particular extralinguistic situations. The aim of phonostylistics is to analyze all possible kinds of spoken utterances with the main purpose of identifying the phonetic features, both segmental and suprasegmental, which are restricted to certain kinds of contexts, to explain why such features have been used and to classify them into categories based upon a view of their function
2.03 Varieties of language correlating with social situations are generally termed styles. The distinctive features of styles include language features of various kinds, among which phonetic modifications play the leading role in oral speech. The main circumstances of reality that course phonetic modification in speech are as follows 
the aim of spontaneity of speech (which may be to instruct, to inform, to narrate, to chat, etc.);" 
the extent of spontaneity of speech (unprepared speech, prepared speech):
the nature of interchange, i.e. the use of a form of speech which may either suggest only listening, or both listening and an exchange of remarks (a lecture, a discussion, a conversation, etc.):
social and psychological factors, which determine the extent of formality of speech and the attitudes expressed (a friendly conversation with close friends, a quarrel, an official conversation, etc.). 
These circumstances, or factors, are termed extra-linguistic factors. Thus, different ways of pronunciation caused by extra-linguistic factors and characterized by definite phonetic features, are called phonetic styles, or styles of pronunciation.
2.04 The branch of linguistics that is primarily concerned with the problems of functional styles is called functional stylistics. Stylistics is usually regarded as a specific division of linguistics, as a sister science, concerned not with the elements of the language as such but with their expressive potential. A functional style can be defined as a functional set of formal patterns into which language means are arranged in order to transmit information. A considerable number of attempts have been made in recent years to work out a classification of functional styles. But in spite of this fact, there is no universal classification that is admitted by all analysts 
2.05 Correlation between extra-linguistic and intra-linguistic variation does not necessarily imply that there are as many varieties of language (styles) as there are extra-linguistic situations. It can be defined by three components, that is purpose[ Definition: Purpose can be defined as the motor which sets the chassis of setting and participants going, it is interlinked with the other two components in a very intricate way. The purpose directs the activities of the participants throughout a situation to complete a task. Such purposes can be viewed in terms of general activity types and in terms of the activity type plus specific subject matter.], participants[ Definition: Participants are people involved in communication. Speech is a marker of various characteristics of people, both individual and social: age, gender, family background, occupation, and social roles. Among other things, age is associated with the role structure in the family and in social groups, with the assignment of authority and status, and with the attribution of different levels of competence. The speech behavior of a person not only conveys information about his or her own age but also about the listener or the receiver of the verbal message.], and setting[ Definition: The scene (setting) includes the physical orientation of participants, which is connected with the type of speech activity they are engaged in. Scenes can also be described in the following terms: public – non-public (private), formal–informal, monologuing – dialoguing – poliloguing.]. These components distinguish a situation as the context within which interaction (communication) occurs. Thus a speech situation can be defined by the cooccurrence of two or more interlocutors related to each other in a particular way, having a particular aim of communicating about a particular topic in a particular setting.
First of all, the factors, or dimensions, constituting an extra-linguistic situation are not equally important, as far as modification of language means is concerned. The greatest influence in this respect is exercised by such factors as the social status of the speakers and their relations to each other, the place of communication and its subject-matter (topic) 
2.06 The purpose or the aim of the utterance may be called a phonetic style-forming factor[ Definition: The phonetic style – forming means are the. degree of assimilation, reduction and elision, all of which depend on the degree of. carefulness of pronunciation.]. All other factors cause modifications within this or that style and that is why may be referred to as style-modifying factors 
2.07 Significant variations within each of the given factors (dimensions) are most conveniently described in terms of an opposition: formal/ informal, and there is a strong tendency for identical features (formal or informal) from different dimensions to co-occur: an informal subject-matter tends to be combined with an informal sphere of communication and informal relations between the speakers and vice versa. Accordingly, the broadest and most widely recognized division of English speech is into formal   and informal styles.
Intonation plays a central role in stylistic differentiation of oral texts. Adult speakers are both transmitters and receivers of the same range of phonostylistic effects carried by intonation. The intonation system of a language provides a consistently recognizable invariant basis of these effects from person to person. The uses of intonation in this function show that the information so conveyed is impossible to separate from lexical and grammatical meanings expressed by words and constructions in a language (verbal context) and from situational information (non-verbal context). The meaning of intonation can not be judged in isolation.
2.08 Thus the primary concern of linguistics is the study of language in use. It is particularly relevant for the study of intonational functional styles, because we are interested in how the language units are used in various social situations. An intonational style can be defined as a system of interrelated intonational means which is used in a certain social sphere and serves a definite aim in communication 
The phonetic style-forming means are the degree of assimilation, reduction and elision, all of which depend on the degree of carefulness of pronunciation. Each phonetic style is characterized by a specific combination of certain segmental and prosodic features.
2.09 The British phonetician D. Jones distinguishes such styles of pronunciation as the rapid familiar style, the slower colloquial style, the natural style used in addressing a fair-sized audience, the acquired style of the stage, and the acquired style used in singing 
2.10 T. Kenyon described four principal styles of good spoken English: familiar colloquial, formal colloquial, public-speaking style and public-reading style.
2.11 L.V. Shcherba wrote of the need to distinguish a great variety of styles of speech, in accordance with the great variety of different social occasions and situations, but for the sake of simplicity, he suggested that only two styles of pronunciation should be distinguished: (1) colloquial style characteristic of people's quiet talk, and (2) full style, which we use when we want to make our speech especially distinct and, for this purpose, clearly articulate all the syllables of each word .
2.12 The other way of classifying phonetic styles is suggested by J.A. Dubovsky who distinguishes the following styles: informal ordinary, formal neutral, formal official, informal familiar, declamatory. This division is based on different degrees of formality or rather familiarity between the speaker and the listener.2.13 M.A. Sokolova and other's approach is slightly different. And it is this very classification of phonostyles that is considered useful for teaching and learning purposes. According to M.A. Sokolova, there are five intonational styles singled out mainly according to the purpose of communication. They are as follows:
-Informational (Formal) style  
-Academic (Scientific) style he speaker (lecturer).
-Publicistic style
-Declamatory (Artistic) style
-Conversational (Familiar) style
2.14 As we may see the above-mentioned phonetic styles on the whole correlate with functional styles of the language. They are differentiated on the basis of spheres of discourse. For instance, according to professor I.R. Galperin there are such verbal functional styles of the written language as: (1) belles-lettres style, embracing genres of creative writing; (2) publicistic style, covering such genres as essays, feature article, public speeches: (3) newspaper style, observed in the majority of materials printed in newspapers; (4) scientific prose style, found in articles, brochures, monographs, and other scientific, academic publications; (5) the style of official documents.
These styles are the product of the development of the written variety of language. In the case of oral representation of written texts, each verbal style is given a phonetic identity. Thus the situational context and the speaker's purpose determine the choice of an intonational style. The primary situational determinant is the kind of relationship existing between the participants in a communicative transaction.
